# Homework-1
										                                                                          Aaron Sechler

Square, Inc. Case Study.

Origins and Funding History of Square

Square was founded in February 2009 in Saint Louis, Missouri by Jack Dorsey, Jim Mcklevey, and Tristian O’Tiernay. Jack Dorsey had already founded Twitter and was no longer it’s CEO at that point, and has said in interviews that he got the idea for Square when his friend Jim Mcklevey, who was running a glass blowing studio at the time, was unable to close a sale because he didn’t have a way to accept a credit card payment. [FN1] This lead to the creation of their first product, a credit card reader that attached to a phone or tablet that offered a simple, easy to use interface and a fee structure that was more transparent than alternatives that were on the market at the time. Square has continually expanded and added additional products and capabilities as detailed below. Jack Dorsey is still the CEO of Square, Jim Mcklevey was Chairman until 2010, and Tristian O’Tiernay left the company in 2013.[FN2]

Square had it’s initial IPO in November of 2015 after going through five rounds of funding. It was a so called “unicorn” - a business that managed to achieve a billion dollar valuation before going public. It’s initial stock price valued the company at $2.9 billion dollars, which was less than half of the $6 billion dollar valuation used in the final round of funding 13 months earlier, and about 10% less than the $3.25 billion used in the fourth funding in September 2012. [FN3] After some initial struggles it’s stock rose steadily until September 2018, when it was worth roughly 11 times what it was at the time of Square’s IPO. The stock has fluctuated widely since, but it now worth the most ithas ever been and the current market capitalization is 45.82 Billion.

Overview of Current Business Activities

Square is currently growing two different “ecosystems” of related products, one aimed at sellers and other at individuals. [FN4] The seller ecosystem, which began with the simple card reader mentioned above, includes software designed to make it easier to run many aspects of a small business while simplifying and speeding up businesses access to funds. The original card scanner has been joined by several other ways to accept payments, including a virtual terminal that allows merchants to accept in person payments on a computer without a separate device, a variety of different attachments for phones and tablets, a stand alone terminal that doesn’t require a phone or tables, and an e-commerce platform. These products use a simple fee structure of .10 cents + 2.6% of each transaction, and while this isn’t cheaper than the typical credit card processing agreement it does allows business to keep track of their actual intake as it happens instead of waiting for a monthly bill detailing that month’s fees.[FN5]

The point of sale system is integrated with one of three sets of products that are tailored to individual types of businesses. Square for Retail, which allows retail business to track their inventory, Square Appointments, which allows service providers to offer online appointment books, and Square for Restaurants, which has things like table management and other features tailored to restaurants needs. All of these services are completely integrated with the payment systems, and allow business to track employee hours, generate payroll, purchase orders, invoices, and a variety of analytical tools designed to help businesses improve. There’s a similar set of tools designed to help ecommerce, which even offers vendors high quality photographs of merchandise they ship to Square.

All of these products are supported by an API that lets users and developers customize products for individual users and develop aps that can be sold to others on the Square Market place. 

Square also offers it’s business customers a Square Card, which is a debit card that allows instant access to funds processed over Square so that their customers can begin spending their money as soon as possible while generating more fees for Square.

All of these services give Square an immense amount of data about their clients, which allows them to offer several additional features. Their risk management software, which is built into every ecommerce payment system, uses machine learning tailored to each individual business to evaluate the risk of every transaction and identify patterns of fraudulent activity. 

The most impressive current use of their data is Square Finance, which allows businesses that use Square’s POS systems to go borrow up to $250,000 by going to a section of the POS and seeing how much credit can be extended to them and the terms of the offer. There’s no complicated application process and the funds are available in their Square account the next day, which is several months quicker than getting funding through a traditional Small Business Administration approved loan takes. The amount of interest is fixed up front and isn’t affected by the amount of time it takes to repay the loan. Loan payments are automatically deducted from funds processed by Square everyday, which reduces Squares risk, and since the payments are a portion of daily transactions the loan payments vary with the customers cashflow. Users have between 12 and 18 months to pay the loan back and may be offered new loans once existing ones are 70% repaid. Square doesn’t explicitly say that this is done with machine learning, but they are aggressively recruiting in that sector and their stackflow includes several data management and cloud computing tools.[FN6] The large amount of data that they have on their borrowers must be run through a system that allows them to correctly identify the risk in each borrower, and the way the loan is repaid before the business gets any of their day to day proceeds also insures low risk. Square recently got regulatory approval to open a business bank in Utah next year, which will allow them to move away from their current practice where an outside bank originates the loan, which is then sold at a discount while it’s being collected.[FN7] Square has said that they intend to continue selling the loans but will originate them with the new bank. 

The other “ecosystem” is centered around Square’s Cash App, which is an app that functions like a crude online bank account.[FN8] Users can have their paychecks deposited directly to Cash App, buy and sell stocks and bitcoin, and the app functions like a Square Card for in person transactions. It has a “boost” function that allows the user to get a discount at specific businesses or types, which will let Square sell marketing opportunities, but lacks many of the basic things that a bank offers like an interest bearing savings account or a credit facility, but the CFO of Square has said that she think that Cash App will eventually function like a bank and I’m sure those features will be available sooner rather than later.[FN9]

Square recently acquired two artificial intelligence firms. In March 2019 acquired Eloquent Labs, which created a conversational interface called Elle that is designed to help vendors process things like returns using natural language processing, and Square says that these types of tools will be integrated into existing products.[FN10] It acquired Canadian Machine Learning specialists Dessa in February 2020, who are known for creating open source software that can be used to detect “Deep Fake” videos.[FN11] It also acquired Spanish Payment company Verse last week, which is intended to give it a foothold in Spain, as well as Portugal, the UK, and France.[FN12]

The potential users for both ecosystems are in theory every business and consumer in the US, but the reality is that in both sectors more sophisticated and wealthier potential customers will have more and better options. Square’s focus on credit card payments make it best suited to the american market where credit cards are more heavily utilized. Currently 91% of it’s customers are in the US, and 90% perfect of them are small businesses with revenues of less than $50M.[FN13] Square attempts to counter this by changing their fee structures depending on the size of the client, letting small businesses use their software for free and giving larger companies breaks on transaction fees.[FN14] Square has identified the potential side of their seller market at more than 100 billion dollars a year, and gives a 60 billion plus figure for their individual user market, which gives them an 85 billion dollar opportunity on the seller side.[FN15] These projections acknowledge that their primary target are “micro” businesses with less than $250,000 a year in revenue and say that they have only captured less 3% of the seller market. The projections on the individual side don’t acknowledge that they need to move upmarket to grow in the same way, but they do say that they have captured less than 2% of the potential market.

CEO Jack Dorsey identified their key feature as “stickyness” in a 2019 conference call with investors, saying that “[With] a lot of our single-focus competitors, a customer can fire them and it fires the entire company, whereas they may fire one part of our ecosystem but still use three other things [of ours]”  and went on to claim that the depth of their ecosystem is their “core differentiator”.[FN16] The other key element of Square’s business is it’s easy to use interface, 

Landscape

Square’s services are currently quite broad, they quickly moved from their origins as a Payment Processor and have been lending money like a bank for several years and will open it’s own bank next year. This move from Payments into things that were traditionally provided by banks and other financial service institutions is one of the big trends in the payment area and in tech in general, Apple introduced an electronic credit card for use in apple pay and Google will start offering checking accounts this year, so Square’s trajectory exemplifies one of the main trends of Fintech generally.[FN17]  A McKinsey report from 2016 on 7 critical changes that will happen as Fintech matures predicted that “Ecosystems will likely develop to follow customer needs, rather than to follow traditional industry lines. Leaders in these ecosystems will need strong data analytic capabilities to develop useful insights from the torrent of customer information available” - which perfectly predicted what Square would do.[FN18] FT Partners, which identifies itself as the only investment bank focused on Fintech, identifies Square as “an increasingly dominant force in providing merchant acquiring and other services to small businesses” and says it’s done for brick and mortar stores what PayPal did for online retailers in a 2019 report.[FN19]

Square has many, many competitors in almost everything it does, but the one competitor that offers the largest number of similar services is Paypal. Paypal offers PaypalHere, which is a payment system that is very similar to the Square’s original credit card processing system and is priced almost identically - Paypal charges 2.7% of every transaction as compared to Square’s ten cents plus 2.6% fee.[FN20] While PayPal does let you create a POS system and create invoices it does lack the rest of the features of Square’s ecosystem, although you can link a credit card to your PayPal account to create something that functions like a Square Card. 

There are at least four other major competitors for in the inperson credit card system, including Intuit-Quick Books Go Payment, which charges .25 cents plus 2.4%, making it cheaper for the merchant if they primarily process larger transactions. It can also be integrated with Quick Books accounting software. Other competitors are ShopKeep, Clover, and Shopify, although only Clover offers a similar set of software to users.[FN21]

Square’s competitors in the lending space are once again PayPal and a different set of competitors, which don’t include traditional banks because Fintech lenders can get their clients money into their hands by the next day and a traditional SBA approved small business loan can take months, and many of the businesses that Square lends to are not established enough to borrow from a traditional lender.[FN22] PayPal has two lending programs, LoanBuilder a PayPal Working Service, and PayPal Working Capital. The later is very much like Square Capital - you qualify based on the amount of business you do on PayPal and the loan payments are automatically withheld from your PayPal transactions. LoanBuilder differs from both Square Capital and PayPal Working Capital in that you don’t have to use a particular payment service to borrow, and the terms of the loans are more flexible. There are several other competitors in the space, including Kabbage, Funding Circle, Fora Financial, OnDeck, and National Business Capital. These offer loans that are broadly similar to Square, although some take a few days longer to come through, offer better rates, or allow you borrow more money.[FN23] 

Results

Since entering the market in 2009 Square has performed strongly by almost any metric, although there have been a few missteps. It’s managed to make itself one of the major players in the Payment space with an strong initial product, has continually increased the amount of services that it offers customers, and has managed to build a strong brand that inspires trust, and “managed to start a second wave of payments innovation: professional payments tools for merchants.”[FN24] It has been able to leverage it’s largest asset, it’s size, to ensconce itself in it’s customer’s businesses, which has been aided by a user interface that’s been praised as simple and easy to use.[FN25] It’s also managed to grow it’s revenue by 43%, 49%, and 29% for the last three calendar years, and it’s pre-covid 1st quarter was 43% higher than Q1 2019.[FN26]

Square has performed strongly in most of it’s core areas using many traditional metrics. Enlyft, a company that sells data about other companies, says that Square currently has 27.84% of the market, which is more than twice as much as the next largest competitor.[FN27] Square’s own reports show that it’s seller base is 1.7 times the size it was in 2015 and that it makes 2.3 times as much per seller as it did then, the way that it makes money from sellers has steadily diversified since 2016, it also has excellent customer retention.[FN28] Cash App has also shown explosive growth recently, with the number of accounts that complete at least one transaction a month tripling in the last two years, and the number of accounts that show actively daily has also increased in the last year, and this division also has strong customer retention and positive gross profit retention for every group of users added in a particular year.

A 2015 McKinsey report identified six key markers of success for Fintech companies, and Square clearly meets several of them.[FN29] The first factor identified is that the Fintech company must be able to add customers cheaply, and both sectors of Square are able to recoup the cost of acquiring customers within a year and continue to make money on that set of customers afterwards.[FN30] Square also clearly meets the third and fourth factors, innovative uses of data and segment specific propositions. Using data generated by the POS system to determine creditworthiness is a clever use of data, and the report specifically identifies small businesses and the underbanked as large market segments that are likely to be open to innovative approaches not offered by traditional banks, and both of Square’s sectors specifically target these areas. Square’s investment in machine learning to reduce it’s regulatory exposure in the event of widespread fraud lets it meet the sixth requirement, and it has been willing to work with existing banks in it’s Square Capital business and meets the fifth requirement of being able to use existing banking infrastructure to it’s advantage.

The most logical company to compare Square’s performance to is PayPal, since they are direct competitors in many of the core business areas, and since PayPal was acquired by Ebay in 2002 and spun off in 2015 they’ve actually been public companies for roughly the same period of time. PayPal is a much larger company, which is reflected in both revenue and market capitalization, both of which are four or five times as large as Square’s, but PayPal is showing smaller and steadily decreasing levels of levels of revenue growth, with 15%, 18%, and 21% over the last three years.[FN31] It’s stock price has grown more steadily than Squares, going from $34 a share to about $170 today, whereas Square has gone from $9 at IPO to $104 after an initial rough period.[FN32] Square’s achievement is more impressive when you consider that while it’s CEO was already widely known it built it’s business from scratch, whereas PayPal had a large, well established user base when it was spun off from Ebay in 2015. 

Recommendations

My biggest recommendation to Square would be to closely monitor the way that Payment systems evolve in other countries. Square is heavily reliant on credit and debit card processing fees, which make up 65% of their revenue.P[FNFN33] This approach clearly works well in the United States where credit cards continue to be strong, but as more and more of the American consumer base grew up with technology mobile payment is on the rise and will reach a new high in 2020.[FN34] This puts Sqaure in an odd position - they were able to disrupt the financial industry by offering better credit card processing and quicker lending, but are in danger of being disrupted themselves if alternative forms of payment catch on like they have in other parts of the world. This means they need to stay on top of the way that alternate payments emerge, and should look to either acquire or partner with any strong player in phone to phone payments that emerges in the future. I’m sure the hope is that Cash App takes on that roll, which would give them a terrific source of data about consumers, but if someone else takes a leading roll they should look to merge the new system into Cash App.

The same analysis of their business structure leads would make me encourage them to put as much effort and assets as possible into growing the Cash App side of the business until it’s large enough to provide them with enough data about consumer behavior for them to really grow the boost function of Cash App, which already allows them to offer opportunities for sellers to market to Cash App users. A basic way to do this would be to make the Cash App offerings more and more like a real banks, with savings accounts and credit offerings. I do have some reservations about the applicability of the lending model used on the seller side, which would become too much like the predatory pay-day lending companies if payments were deducted from paychecks without the user’s approval. Subjecting Cash App data to the same type of machine learning analysis that’s used on the seller side would give them the ability to make better credit cards or purchase loans that the user can truly afford. 

FN1.https://www.fastcompany.com/1643271/square-brings-credit-card-swiping-mobile-masses-starting-today (Cited in the Wikipedia Article on Square.); https://www.fool.com/investing/2018/11/21/square-stock-history-a-complete-timeline.aspx
FN2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jim_McKelvey; https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/03/04/tristan-otierney-square-co-founder-dies/
FN3. https://www.fool.com/investing/2018/11/21/square-stock-history-a-complete-timeline.aspx
FN4.For a helpful chart that provides a broad overview of Square’s current products see page 3 of an investor update on Square’s website. The descriptions of their individual products are taken from their website. Also see the general description of their activities from their most recent 10-Q.
https://assets.ctfassets.net/2d5q1td6cyxq/5OGeVzoqFhPGvkLNAUukJ9/1602ef542e4e7e6acfb721d668e36401/Investor-Update-March-2020.pdf
www.squareup.com
https://s21.q4cdn.com/114365585/files/doc_financials/2020/Q1/Q1FY20-Square-Inc-10-Q.pdf
FN5. See Motley Fool article in footnote 3.
FN6. Jack Dorsey says that Square is looking to stockpile data science talent in this conversation with Andrew Yang. https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1&v=qkt-iphB40U&feature=emb_logo
https://stackshare.io/square/square Snowflake, vertica, Amazon EC2, and Airflow are data services that stackshare says they use.
FN7.https://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/news/2020/03/19/s-f-fintech-square-gets-regulatory-nod-to-open-a.html
FN8.Features pulled from the Cash App website. cash.app
FN9.https://www.fool.com/investing/2018/09/19/square-wants-cash-app-to-completely-replace-your-b.aspx
FN10.https://developer.squareup.com/blog/eloquent-labs-joins-square/
FN11.https://squareup.com/us/en/press/dessa-joins-square
FN12.https://www.fool.com/investing/2020/06/17/square-latest-acquisition-positions-it-in-europe.aspx
FN13.https://enlyft.com/tech/products/square
FN14.https://finance.yahoo.com/news/biggest-advantage-square-apos-ecosystem-180000735.html
FN15.See page 7 of the Investor Update mentioned in note 4.
FN16.Dorsey is quoted here, the author of the article agrees with his analysis. https://www.fool.com/investing/2019/03/05/squares-growing-competitive-advantage.aspx The Yahoo finance article cited in footnote 12 offers a similar analysis.
FN17. https://www.paymentsjournal.com/3-payments-trends-to-keep-track-of-in-2020/
FN18. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/bracing-for-seven-critical-changes-as-fintech-matures
FN19. See page 54.  https://ftpartners.docsend.com/view/md5rzt7
FN20.  https://www.paypal.com/us/webapps/mpp/credit-card-reader
FN21.  https://www.fundera.com/blog/square-competitors
FN22. See this oddly cursory Harvard Business School case study.
https://digital.hbs.edu/platform-digit/submission/square-a-winning-playbook-for-data-analytics-monetization/
FN 23.  https://www.finder.com/business-loans-like-square-capital
FN 24.  The quote is from this Forbes article: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2019/12/23/preparing-for-the-next-wave-of-payments-innovation/#5ac942430c44 Also see the FT Partners report in footnote 19, and the 10-Q mentioned in note 4 mentions that the trust in their brand is one of their key assets.
FN 25. https://thenextweb.com/dd/2011/07/10/function-is-nothing-without-beauty-10-sites-doing-it-right/
FN 26. https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/SQ/square/revenue
FN 27. https://enlyft.com/tech/products/square
FN 28. See pages 18-27 of the Investor Notice in footnote 4.
FN 29. See page 5. https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/financial%20services/our%20insights/cutting%20through%20the%20noise%20around%20financial%20technology/cutting-through-the-fintech-noise-full-report.ashx
FN 30. See page 21 for the seller system and 37 for Cash App of the Investor Update cited in footnote 4.
FN 31. https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/PYPL/paypal-holdings/revenue
FN 32.  https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/pypl?ltr=1; https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/SQ?p=SQ&.tsrc=fin-srch
FN 33. https://www.investopedia.com/how-square-makes-money-4801197
FN 34. https://www.forbes.com/sites/shelleykohan/2020/03/01/fueled-by-increased-consumer-comfort-mobile-payments-in-the-uswill-exceed-130-billion-in-2020/#5c336d7144f2


